---
layout: post
title:  "RUST Documentation 따라 공부하기 6"
date:   2019-12-30 19:00:00 +0700
categories: [rust]
---

# Ownership

> It enables Rust to make memory safety guarantees without needing a garbage collector.

In Rust, memory is managed through a system of ownership with a set of rules that the compiler checks at compile time. None of the ownership features slow down the program while it's running.



### The Stack and the Heap

* The **stack** stores values in the order it gets them and removes the values in the opposite order. (Last In First Out)
* Adding data is called *pushing onto the stack*, and removing data is called *popping off the stack*. 

* All data stored on the stack must have a known, fixed size.
* Data with an unknown size at compile time or a size that might change must be stored on the **heap** instead.
* When I put data on the heap, the OS finds an empty spot in the heat, marks it as being in use, and returns a *pointer*, which is the address of that location.
* This process is called *allocating on the heap* and is somtimes abbreviated as just *allocating*. (Pushing values onto the stack is not considered allocating.)
* Because the pointer is a known, fixed size, I can store the pointer on the stack, but when I want the actual data, I must follow the pointer.
* Pushing to the stack is faster than allocating on the heap. ( The OS never has to search for a place to store new data; that location is always at the top of the stack. )

* Accessing data in the heap is slower than accessing data on the stack. ( I have to follow a pointer to get there. )

> Keeping track of what parts of code are using what data on the heap, minimizing the amount of duplicate data on the heap, and cleaning up unused data on the heap so you don’t run out of space are all problems that ownership addresses. Once you understand ownership, you won’t need to think about the stack and the heap very often, but knowing that managing heap data is why ownership exists can help explain why it works the way it does.



### Ownership Rules

* Each value in Rust has a variable that's called its *owner*.
* There can only be one owner at a time.
* When the owner goes out of scope, the value will be dropped.



### The `String` Type

```rust
let s = "hello"; // string literals

let s = String::from("hello"); // immutable string

let must s = String::from("hello"); // mutable
s.push_str(", world!");
println!("{}", s);
```

* The double colon(`::`) is an operator that allows us to namespace this particular `from` function under the `String` type rather than using some sort of name like `string_from`.
* `String` can be mutated but literals cannot. (Why? - Memory and Allocation)



### Memory and Allocation

> In the case of a string literal, we know the contents at compile time, so the text is hardcoded directly into the final executable. This is why string literals are fast and efficient. But these properties only come from the string literal’s immutability. Unfortunately, we can’t put a blob of memory into the binary for each piece of text whose size is unknown at compile time and whose size might change while running the program.

* With the `String` type, in order to support a mutable, growable piece of text, we need to allocate an amount of memory on the heat, unknown at compile time, to hold the contents.
* The memory must be requested from the OS at runtime. ( String::from )
* We need a way of returning this memory to the OS when we're done with our `String`.
  * In languages with a *Garbage Collector*(GC) keeps track and cleans up memory that isn't being used anymore.
  * Without a GC, it's our responsibility to identify when memory is no longer being used and call code to explicitly return it.
  * Doing this correctly is important.
  * Rust takes a different path: the memory is automatically returned once the variable that owns it goes out of scope.
  * Rust calls `drop` automatically at the closing curly bracket.



### Ways Variables and Data Interact: Move

```rust
let x = 5;
let y = x;

let s1 = String::from("hello");
let s2 = s1; // this doesn't work like what we expected.
```

`String` is made up of three parts: pointer, length, capacity.

* **length** is how much memory, in bytes, the contents of the `String` is currently using.

* **capacity** is the total amount of memory, in bytes, that the `String` has received from the OS.

* When we assign `s1` to `s2`, the `String` data is copied, meaning we copy the pointer, the length, and the capacity that are on the stack. ( We do not copy the data on the heat that the pointer refers to. )

* When `s2` and `s1` go out of scope, they will both try to free the same memory. It is called *double free* error. Freeing memory twice can lead to memory corruption.

* So, Rust considers `s1` to no longer be valid and, therefore, Rust doesn't need to free anything when `s1` goes out of scope.

  ```rust
  fn main() {
    let s1 = String::from("hello");
    let s2 = s1;
    
    println!("{}, world!", s1); // error : value used here after move
    println!("{}, world!", s2); // it's okay
  }
  ```

* The concept of copying the pointer, length, and capacity without copying the data probably sounds like making a shallow copy.
* Rust invalidates `s1`, instead of being called a shallow copy, it's known as a *move*. 
* In this case, only `s2` valid. So, when it goes out of scope, it alone will free the memory.

* If we do want to deeply copy the heap data of the `String`, not just the stack data, we can use a common method called `clone`.

  ```rust
  fn main() {
    let s1 = String::from("hello");
    let s2 = s1.clone();
    
    println!("s1 = {}, s2 = {}", s1, s2);
  }
  ```

* How about integer?

  Types such as integers that have a known size at compile time are stored entirely on the stack, so copies of the actual values are quick to make.

* Rust has a special annotation called the `Copy` trait.

  * If a type has the `Copy` trait, an older variable is still usable after assignment.

  * Rust won;t let us annotate a type with the `Copy` trait if the type, or any of its parts, has implemented the `Drop` trait.

  * Types that are `Copy`

    * All the integer types, such as `u32`.

    * The Boolean type, `bool`.

    * All the floating point types, such as `f64`.

    * The character type, `char`.

    * Tuples, if they only contain types that are also `Copy`

      ex) `(i32, i32)` is `Copy`. `(i32, String)` is not.



### Ownership and Functions

```rust
fn main() {
  let s = String::from("hello");
  takes_ownership(s); // s's value moves into the function
  // s is no longer valid here

  let x = 5;
  makes_copy(x); // i32 is Copy
  // it's okay to still use x
}

fn takes_ownership(some_string: String) {
  println!("{}", some_string);
} // some_string goes out of scope and 'drop' is called. -> memory is freed.

fn makes_copy(some_integer: i32) {
  println!("{}", some_integer);
}
```



### Return Values and Scope

Returning values can also transfer ownership.

```rust
fn main() {
  let s1 = gives_ownership(); // this function moves its return values into s1
  
  let s2 = String::from("hello"); // s2 comes into scope
  
  let s3 = takes_and_gives_back(s2); // s2 is moved into fn,
  // also moves its return value into s3
} // s3 goes out of scope, -> drop,
// s2 goes out of scope, moved -> nothing happens
// s1 goes out of scope -> dropped


fn gives_ownership() -> String {
  let some_string = String::from("hello");
  some_string
}

fn takes_and_gives_back(a_string: String) -> String {
  a_string
}
```



> Taking ownership and then returning ownership with every function is a bit tedious.
>
> What if we want to let a function use a value but not take ownership?
>
> It's possible to return multiple values using a tuple.

```rust
fn main() {
  let s1 = String::from("hello");
  
  let (s2, len) = calculate_length(s1);
  println!("The length of '{}' is {}.", s2, len);
}

fn calculate_length(s1: String) -> (String, usize) {
  let length = s.len();
  (s, length)
}
```

